DTI and DOLE 
Interim Guidelines on 
Workplace Prevention and 
Control of COVID
19

BACKGROUND
 ▪ March 8: Declaration of State of Public Health Emergency
 through Proclamation No. 922
 ▪ March16: Implementation of Luzon-wide ECQ until April 14
 ▪ April 7: Extension of the Luzon-wide ECQ until April 30
 ▪ April 23: Recommendation of the IATF for the issuance of
 guidelines by different government agencies to provide policy
 directions for the public and stakeholders in complying with
 Government regulations following the modification of ECQ

OBJECTIVE & COVERAGE
 ▪ To assist private institutions allowed to operate during the ECQ
 and GCQ in developing the minimum health protocols and
 standards in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
 ▪ Applies to all workplaces, employer and workers in the private
 sector.
 ▪ Aligned with DOH AO 2020-0015 (Guidelines on the Risk-based
 Public Health Standards for COVID 19 Mitigation; April 27, 2020)

WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH
 A. Increasing physical and mental resilience
 B. Reducing transmission of COVID-19
 C. Minimizing contact rate
 D. Reducing risk of infection from COVID-19

WSH: Increasing Physical & Mental 
Resilience
 1. Emphasize everyday actions to stay healthy such as:
 a. Eat nutritious and well-cooked food,
 b. Drink plenty of fluids and avoiding alcoholic beverages,
 c. Haveadequate rest and at least 8 hours of sleep, and
 d. Exercise regularly;
 2. Enjoin companies to provide free medicines and vitamins; and
 3. Provide referral for workers needing counselling or presenting
 with mental health concerns.

WSH: Reducing transmission of COVID
19 (PRIOR TO ENTRANCE in buildings or workplaces)
 a. All employers and workers shall:
 Wear mask at all times
 (may use cloth masks),

 Accomplish daily the 
health symptoms 
questionnaire,

 Have your temperature 
checked and 
recorded, and

 Spray alcohol to both 
hands and provide foot 
baths at the entrance, if 
practicable;

WSH: Reducing transmission of COVID
19 (PRIOR TO ENTRANCE in buildings or workplaces)
 b. Disinfect equipment or vehicle
 entering the operational hub; and
 c. Instill physical distancing of one
 meter on queue outside the office
 or store premises.

WSH: Reducing transmission of COVID
19 (INSIDE THE WORKPLACE)
 a. Clean and disinfect at least once
 every 2 hours all work areas and
 frequently handled objects;
 b. Provide sufficient clean water and
 soap in all washrooms and toilets;
 c. Encourage workers to wash hands
 frequently and avoid touching face
 d. Provide
 sanitizers
 in
 corridors,
 conference areas, elevators, stairways
 and areas where workers pass;


WSH: Reducing transmission of COVID
19 (inside the workplace)
 d. Practice physical distancing of 1 meter
 radius space between workers at all
 times;
 e. Communaleating is discouraged
 f.
 Ensure that physical distancing is
 maintained if eating in dining areas;
 dispose wastes properly; and
 g. Clean and disinfect regularly canteens
 and kitchens.

WSH: Minimizing contact rate
 1. Adoption of alternative work
 arrangements- shift work or staggered
 work hours, WFH;
 2. Discourage prolonged face-to-face
 interaction between workers and with
 clients;- Masksshould be worn- Meetings with minimum pax and
 short duration- Usevideoconferencing


WSH: Minimizing contact rate
 3. Arrange office tables to maintain
 proper physical distancing;
 4. Design workstation layout to allow
 for unidirectional movement in
 aisles, corridors or walkways;
 5. Limit number of people in enclosed
 space;– Elevators: physical distancing

WSH: Minimizing contact rate
 6. Encourage use of stairs with physical
 distancing (unidirectional if possible);
 7. Encourage highly the use of online
 system for clients needing assistance
 from offices including the use of
 videoconferencng; and
 8. Roving officer ( ex, safety officer) shall
 ensure
 physical
 distancing
 observance of health protocols.

WSH: Reducing risk of infection from 
COVID-19 (worker is a COVID-19 suspect)
 a. The worker shall immediately
 proceed to the designated isolation
 area and never remove his/her mask.
 b. Clinic personnel attending to the
 workers should wear appropriate
 PPEs and, if needed, require the
 transport of the affected worker to
 the nearest hospital.
 • PCR testing shall be done and results
 reported by hospital to DOH

WSH: Reducing risk of infection from 
COVID-19 (worker is a COVID-19 suspect)
 c. Decontamination of workplace:
 i.
 Workplace shall be decontaminated
 with appropriate disinfectants;
 ii.
 Department of Labor and Employment
 After decontamination of the work
 area, work can resume after 24 hours;
 and
iii.
 Workers present in the work area with
 the suspect COVID-19 worker shall go
 on 14 days homequarantine.

WSH: Reducing risk of infection from 
COVID-19 (worker is sick or has fever, not COVID-19)
 Employer must advise the worker to take
 prudent measures to limit the spread of
 communicable diseases, as follows:
 i. Stay at home and keep away from work or crowds;
 ii.  Take adequate rest and plenty of fluids;
 iii. Practice personal hygiene to prevent spread of disease; and
 iv. Seek appropriate medical care if there is:- Persistent fever,- Difficulty of breathing, or- Weakness

DUTIES OF EMPLOYERS
1. Provide the necessary company policies for
 the prevention and control of COVID-19 in
 consultation with workers;– Advocacy andIECprogramsfrom reliablesource
 2. Provide resources and materials needed to
 keep the worker healthy and the workplace
 safe (masks, soap, disinfectants, PPE, testing
 kit);
 3. Designate a safety officer to monitor
 COVID-19 prevention and control measures;
4. Enhance health insurance provision for
 workers;
 5. Provide shuttle services and/or decent
 accommodation on near-site location to
 lessen travel and people movement, when
 feasible;
 6. Enjoin the hiring from the local community;
 and
 7. Put up a COVID-19 Hotline and Call Center
 for employees.

DUTIES OF WORKERS
 1. Comply with all workplace measures in place for the prevention
 and control of COVID-19 (masks, physical distancing, frequent
 handwashing);
 2. Observe proper respiratory etiquette;
 3. Coughandsneeze into tissue or into shirt sleeve
 4. Dispose used tissues properly; and
 5. Disinfect hands immediately after a cough or sneeze.

COVID-19 TESTING
▪ Employers may test workers for
 COVID-19.
 ▪ Testing of workers and interpretation
 of results shall be in accordance with
 DOH Memorandum No. 2020-01801
 and Administrative Order No. 2020
00142.
Revised Interim Guidelines on Expanded Testing for COVID-19, 16  April 2020
 2 Guidelines in Securing a License to Operate a COVID-19 Testing Laboratory in the Philippines, 07  April 2020

MOST AT RISK WORKERS AND 
VULNERABLE GROUPS
 ▪ Employer are highly encouraged to allow
 most at risk workers and vulnerable groups
 to do work from homearrangement.- Most at risk workers: >60 years old or of
 any age with co-morbidities or pre
existing illness
 ▪ Work arrangements should be developed
 to detail the workers’ deliverables and
 there shall be no diminution in wages or
 benefits.

ASSISTANCE AND REPORTING
 ▪ DTI and DOLE shall extend assistance and technical support to all
 workplaces, employers and workers in complying with the
 Guidelines.
 ▪ The employer shall provide the DOLE through its Regional Office,
 copy furnished the DOH, monthly reporting of illness, diseases and
 .
 injuries utilizing the DOLE Work Accident/Illness Report Form
